The station of the cross presents sermons for everyday living, powerful sermons from faithful and inspirational priests.
Our first sermon for today is entitled The Second Sunday of Lent, The Transfiguration.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, amen.
In today's Holy Gospel we have the familiar account of our Lord's Transfiguration on the Mount.
And we know that He took His three most beloved apostles apart from the others up to that mountain to teach them a very important lesson.
The Gospel tells us plainly that He took Peter, and James, and His brother John.
And we know that those three apostles
would be greatly strengthened that day in their faith, which was so, so very, very much immature.
And certainly Peter must have been quite happy to be taken apart.
Peter enjoyed kind of the privileged position that he enjoyed, kind of understood that our Lord had a predilection for him.
And he, of course, loved our Lord, as did all the apostles.
But Peter in particular of course always kind of, he was the eldest I think, and he certainly held moral sway over the others to a very large degree.
Giving us some evidence of the great office to which our Lord would soon call him, namely to be the Pope, to be his first vicar on earth.
And we can imagine the apostles were pretty amazed that our Lord was taking them apart and leaving the others behind.
Taking them up to a high place.
And then of course, he was wondrously transfigured before them.
And of course, they must have been instantaneously enthralled, ecstatic, absolutely overcome with emotion and filled with profound admiration at our Lord's demonstration of His divinity.
And they must have been very content at that very moment.
But we know that their contentment didn't last long.
because our Lord summoned Moses and Elias, the great patriarch, the great prophet, he summoned them to him.
And so they came and began speaking with our Lord.
And the fathers of the church, when they look at this gospel, tells us that our Lord took Moses and Elias a few paces off and began speaking with them about his sacred passion that was to come.
And it's exactly at this moment that St. Peter
Over here is what's being discussed in St. Peter.
As he always does, hatches a plan to try to avoid trouble.
Peter was not someone who liked trouble.
We know that from many, many places in the gospel.
He was always trying to cut trouble off at the pass.
And this hearing about our Lord's passion, of course, filled him with dread, filled him with regret, filled him with a sense of why must that be?
And so St. Peter, boundless and trepid, fearless St. Peter, goes running up to our Lord, even while he's in the midst of talking to these two great Old Testament figures, whom of course the Jews revered, Moses and Elias.
And he says, hey Lord, we don't actually have to go back down to Jerusalem and suffer your passion and death.
I've got a plan.
We can build three tabernacles, three tents right here, one for you, one for Moses and one for Elias and John and James and I will just sleep on the ground.
I guess I don't know what Peter was thinking.
He was content to take a second place to Moses and Elias.
There was no problem with that, but they were going to stay up on that mountain and never come back down.
And of course we know that God the Father intervened at that moment.
God the Father manifests Himself through the cloud.
And St. Peter, John, and James fall flat on their faces filled with awestruck and filled with divine and reverential fear, fear of the divine presence, which they hadn't realized fully was already there in our divine Savior.
That's how you and I should be before the divine presence filled with an awesome and holy fear of the greatness of Almighty God.
And of course, God the Father issues forth that great command of those apostles.
This is my beloved son in whom I will please do as he instructs you, do what he tells you to do.
And with that, of course, God the Father, Moses and Elias is at war retreat.
from the scene leaving only Jesus.
And we are told that the apostles get up off the ground and looking up they see only Jesus.
We too must of course keep Jesus, give him center place in our life.
For no man comes to the Father except that our divine Savior, the Lord Jesus, draw him.
And we should ask
Since He is our mediator with God the Father, we should ask the Lord Jesus daily to draw us ever closer to His Father, to our eternal Father, for we are sons of God created in the image and likeness of God.
So were Adam and Eve created in the garden.
And we know that in the garden was a tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Adam and Eve had the gift of immortality.
And the theologians tell us that if they had eaten of the tree of life, they would have lived forever.
That tree was given special power by Almighty God to sustain them, such that they would never die.
And at some point that God simply would have assumed them body and soul while yet alive.
They would not even have passed through death's door, as even our blessed lady did, but they would have gone straight to heaven without the separation of body and soul.
But sadly, Adam and Eve were not content to eat of the tree of life which God gave them.
They decided to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
And with that tree came death.
With that tree came a loss of innocence.
With that tree came suffering into the world.
The world didn't know suffering here before because the world was created by God to be exempt from the pains and travails in which we find ourselves today.
But we know also, of course, that Almighty God had plans for a Redeemer.
We confess to be the Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer and Savior of the human race.
And that our Lord mounted the tree of the cross in order that He might restore life to the world in order that we might have life eternal.
And as I'm sure you've heard many, many times, it is the tradition of the church to believe that indeed the cross on which our Lord
brought to redemption of the world.
It was erected over the very spot on Calvary, the place of the skull, where the skull of our first father, Adam, lay buried.
And that just as the skull of Adam lay buried for all those centuries, and just as the soul of Adam, with the other men and women who were found just before God, just as the soul of Adam remained in the limbo of the fathers, awaiting our Lord's ascension into eternal life,
that the gates of heaven might be opened.
So our Lord wrought eternal life for us on the cross by pouring out the dew of his precious blood upon the ground and renewed our race and wrought a wondrous redemption for us in the outpouring of blood and water from his side on the cross, which gave birth to his church, which of course is the vehicle for salvation for all men.
We need to have a great love of the cross of the Lord Jesus, more love than Peter did.
And that won't be the first time or the only time that Peter seemed to be shirking the cross.
We soon be entering into the passion tide and we know only too well that Peter denied our Lord thrice rather than face, the difficulties and the torments of the cross.
We need to understand that suffering is redemptive
And we need never to shirk the cross, but we need to daily grow in love of it.
We need to grow in love of an imitation of our divine Savior.
The consecration of the chapel at our Lady of Guadalupe Seminary on Wednesday will remind us many, many times over of the sacrifice of Calvary and of the cross.
Each and every time a fixed altar is consecrated, there are placed upon it five Greek crosses.
in remembrance of the five wounds of our divine Savior, two hands, two feet, and the wound in His most blessed side, from which the blood and water flowed.
For every altar is a symbol of Christ Himself, a symbol of Christ Himself.
And of course we know that in the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass
Christ offers himself, makes re-present again that same sacrifice of Calvary to his eternal Father for our salvation.
The cross is everywhere in our holy faith.
We make the sign of the cross every time we come to church.
We make the sign of the cross every time we begin to pray.
And yet so few of us really have trust and confidence in the life-saving power of the cross.
And each and every baptism we mark
a child with a sign of the cross, the never-failing power of the sign of the cross, that that child might be a symbol of the baptism.
And each and every baptism, of course, we know that an indelible mark is placed on the soul of the child, and that child becomes an intimate friend of Almighty God, and is configured to Christ in a special manner
and becomes marked for all eternity as a Christian, whether they remain faithful to their vocation or not.
Baptism wants baptism for all time.
And so we should have a great love of our Lord's cross and not see in the cross the folly that so many in our world see in it.
We don't have a right to eternal life.
It is something offered to us by the eternal Father through the mediation of Jesus Christ.
We can accept it or reject it.
Jesus Christ, of course, came dressed in humble rags that he might redeem us, that we might be clothed in eternal glory.
And on Mount Tabor, he revealed something of his glory to his apostles.
And of course, Saint Peter immediately gravitated towards the glory.
Saint Peter was content right there.
He didn't even concern himself with eternal life or heaven.
He thought that was good enough.
Better work.
It's better than the crucifixion.
It's better than the passion.
Better than the scourging.
Better than nails and thorns.
Better than death.
except you and I as confirmed Christians know that we should rather undergo a thousand deaths than to omit our opportunity to gain eternal life.
No suffering in this world can vitiate the ultimate good of eternal life with Almighty God.
No amount of suffering in this world can compare to the glories which God has prepared for us.
St. Paul makes that clear.
And suffering in this life, as we've said so many times before, is meritorious.
We get credit for suffering now.
We don't get credit for suffering in the hereafter.
Suffer now or suffer later, but suffer.
We must.
When God the Father, of course, didn't spare His only Son, that's the constant theme of passion taught.
He made His Son obedient even unto death, even the death of the cross for what?
us for our salvation.
So we should desire to see that cross exalted and loved by all men because it is the symbol and pledge of our redemption and of our ultimate salvation.
During the stations of the cross, of course, we carry the cross and we call it the way of the cross.
The Roman custom is to carry a black cross with no corpus
That's because, of course, during Passion Tide, often statues are veiled, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And while in the States, we did never follow that custom too well, and we end up using the ordinary crucifix, nevertheless, I think there's something lost in that sort of simplification of the church's practice.
Because when Protestants, of course, trumpet about a cross with no Jesus, they, of course, are trying to do exactly what St. Peter did.
Skip Good Friday, get straight.
to Easter Sunday, skip all the difficulty in the holy week, and go straight to the resurrection and to eternal glory.
But when Catholics, of course, raise up a cross without a corpus, it is not about, in any sense, trying to omit the necessary events of holy week and of our Lord's passion and death.
Rather, it is about reminding ourselves
that even Jesus on the cross will not save us unless we too fasten ourselves to that same cross, unless we embrace that same cross and cling to it.
And therefore sometimes we have crosses with no Jesus, not because we don't treasure our Lord in His passion, but because we desire to make room on that cross as it were for ourselves that we might be nailed to it.
And as we are weak human beings, we get used to anything.
There is nothing so sacred that we cannot develop a certain indifference to if we're not careful.
So sometimes the church uses plain black crosses during passion tide so that it hits us as something striking.
We've seen the crucifix so many times, we've forgotten what it is, whom it is that we're even looking at.
But that black cross is a stark reminder that indeed there is a cost to our salvation and that our Lord Jesus desires to associate us with Himself in the work of salvation, that He will not save us without our cooperation, that He desires that we cooperate with Him in the salvation of souls.
Therefore we need to associate ourselves with our Lord by accepting lovingly the crosses that He fashions for us.
This is nothing new.
We have talked about this many, many times before.
Recall that the sin of our first parents was one of pride, that great spiritual vice of pride.
They weren't subject to their appetites, our first parents, to their lower appetites.
They couldn't sin by lust.
which St. Paul refers to in today's epistle.
They couldn't sin by gluttony.
They couldn't sin by avarice.
They couldn't sin by any of those things.
But they couldn't sin by pride.
And sin by pride they did.
And that sin manifested itself ultimately in grave sin of disobedience against an express command given them by Almighty God.
Do not eat of that tree.
That's the one tree of which you may not eat.
In the day you will eat of that tree, you will die the death.
Almighty God warned Adam and Eve what would happen.
Strangely enough, they didn't seem to care.
They desired to exalt themselves above the limits of our human nature.
They desired to divinize themselves.
They desired to be God.
They desired to usurp those things.
which belong to God, and therefore they sin gravely by disobedience.
Though the greatest remedy, the most perfect remedy for sin in our world is to exercise those virtues, exercise those virtues that run counter to those two vices of pride and disobedience, namely humility and obedience.
The way of humility and the way of obedience is certainly the way that our Lord walked.
That is the way of the cross.
And apart from those great theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity, apart from those, we certainly can hardly begin to do more to glorify God than to be willing to walk the way of the cross.
In other words, to exercise as much as lays in our power those virtues.
of humility and obedience.
Thou art dust, and the dust thou shalt return.
How dare we exalt ourselves in the face of such an express revelation on the part of Almighty God, telling us what we should already know, that we are but a bit of dust.
And unless we are united to our divine Savior in His passion, we will never rise above the limits of our nature.
But by uniting ourselves to our divine Savior, of course, Almighty God offers us a chance at supernatural life, something which so far exceeds any requirement of our nature, that indeed we might be divinized, indeed that we might have a shared participation in God's own divine life.
And so therefore, if we wish to obtain that,
that we must be faithful to the way which Almighty God commanded His Son to walk, the way of humility, the way of indifference to self, the way of love of neighbor, the way of complete and perfect adhesion and obedience to the will of Almighty God.
Critically, of course, we clothe our altars richly in fine cloth, in silk, and in other fine ornaments because the altar is a symbol of Christ.
And not just Christ crucified, but Christ in His divinity, Christ glorified as well.
And it is, of course, the glorified Christ who comes down as it were from heaven at each and every mass, body, blood, soul, and divinity, in the most blessed sacrament.
It became less a practice here in the US to clothe our altars beginning in the 19th century.
Another example of liturgical minimalism
It's our custom.
It's not the church permitted that to happen and not saying it's a bad thing.
And there are different styles and different customs that spring up for things.
It's not the end all and be all.
But nevertheless, sometimes it's nice when you have the altar richly adorned in order that we might, on Holy Thursday, when you strip the altar, the reality becomes more stark that the altar which was richly adorned is now bare.
And indeed that our Lord bared himself on the cross, poured out his blood for us, gave himself completely up to his tormentors, you know, beatings to his father for our salvation.
On September the 14th, we celebrate the feast of the exultation of the cross.
And when the Emperor Heraclius had recovered the cross from the Persian king who had stolen it, he tried to march up Mount Calvary with the cross in order to plant it.
but he was held back by a mysterious force.
And the harder he tried to move forward, the more his feet adhered to the ground, and he could go no further.
Whereupon the Bishop of Jerusalem at that time, Zecharius, told him to take off his royal robes, to take off his fancy clothing, and to wear the garment of a pauper in invitation of our divine Savior, and having divested himself of his royal robes,
The Emperor Heraclius, of course, easily carried the cross to the top of Mount Calvary and planted it in the same spot in which it stood when our Savior hung upon it and gave His life for the world.
So the way of the cross must be a way of humility.
Our first parents were created naked, unclothed, and they only wore clothing after they sinned.
because after, of course, they lost their innocence, they quickly became susceptible to sin.
So we wear clothing because of our weakness.
But we must divest ourselves of anything that would keep us from imitating our divine Savior.
We don't want to be clothed with pride.
We don't want to be clothed with the values of the world.
We want to richly adorn our souls with grace.
And we want our outward appearance to be an external manifestation of an interior peace, of a vibrant faith, and of an ardent charity for our fellow man.
And so we dress in appropriate fashion.
It reveals the interior of our soul, unveiling things we reveal to others how precious they are.
You have heard that before.
No doubt indeed.
So as we prepare to enter in in just a few more weeks into passion tide in which we will veil certain things in the church, let us try to reduce our dependence upon our senses.
That is, let us not give free reign to our senses that we have to see everything, hear everything, taste everything.
But let us try to turn inward a little bit into our souls where the Holy Trinity dwells to seek God there.
where He dwells in our souls by grace, in the silence of our hearts, and asks the Lord Jesus to draw us into an ever greater love and participation in His passion, participating in His holy passion here below, we might be made worthy of His divine life in eternity.
We hope you enjoyed that sermon entitled, The Second Sunday of Lent, The Transfiguration.
Our next sermon is entitled, They saw no one except Jesus alone.
They saw no one except Jesus alone.
in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.
From the cloud of voice said, this is my son, the beloved.
With him I am well pleased.
Listen to him.
When the disciples heard this, they fell to the ground and were overcome by fear.
But Jesus came and touched them saying, get up,
do not be afraid.
And when they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus himself alone.
They saw no one except Jesus himself alone.
That blessed Apostle St. Peter and those sons of thunder, St. James and John, have been enrapped by a vision that revealed but a glimpse of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The first Pope wished above all that this blessed moment would last.
It is good for us to be here, he said.
But the voice sent by God the Father sharpens his focus, our focus.
This is my son.
Listen to him.
If in this transfiguration, Moses and Elijah, the law and the prophets, bear witness to Jesus,
If the splendor that surrounds our blessed Lord hints at his divinity, nevertheless, with the voice of the Father, these external signs fade until nothing is left but Jesus alone.
Our focus should remain upon Jesus alone.
As we continue our Lenten march toward Calvary and retrace the bloodstained steps of our blessed Savior, this holy gospel is a reminder to us
to keep our eyes firmly fixed on our loving Lord, on Christ Himself.
As St. Francis the Sailor so admirably says, we seek God Himself and His holy love, not the consolations, but the consoler, not their sweetness, but the sweet Savior, not their tenderness, but Him who is the delight of heaven and earth.
The Holy Gospel of the Transfiguration is therefore a reminder of how every Christian should view both consolations and their absence, a reminder of where our heart must always truly lie.
Our one true end is God Himself, and we must never mistake the means that help us to love God for the very love of God Himself.
In St. Peter, he who was destined to become the father of all spiritual fathers, we find the perfect reflection of our own poor hearts.
In the preceding chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, our Lord had uttered those awe-inspiring words that remade the fisherman Simon into the pontiff Peter.
Thou art rock, and upon this rock I will build my church.
Moments before Peter had just made a perfect confession of the divinity of Christ, the first of the disciples to do so.
Our Lord Himself said that it was His Father in heaven, God the Father, and not flesh and blood that had revealed this truth to Simon Peter.
However, the man who receives the keys to the kingdom of heaven is not yet the man who will be worthy to use them.
And immediately after having received the promise of the supreme apostolic charge from our Lord and Savior, when Jesus then foretells his passion and death, Saint Peter refuses to accept that his Lord could suffer and die.
We read that, quote, Peter took Jesus aside and began to rebuke him, saying, God forbid it, Lord, this must never happen to you.
But Jesus turned and said to Peter, Get behind me, Satan.
You are a stumbling block to me, for you are setting your mind not on divine things, but on human things.
How often indeed are we become a stumbling block to the work of Jesus Christ in our souls?
How often are our self-seeking aims, our anxieties, our resentments and frustrations
so many causes that leave us constantly in search of Tabor and always avoiding Gethsemane and Calvary.
Peter, James, and John would indeed join our Lord on that other mount, mount all of it in the garden of Gethsemane.
In that garden of our Savior's agony, His divine sorrow would atone for the fall of the first man in the first garden.
Our Lord loved these three apostles with a special love.
And during the transfiguration, he had wished to prepare them.
A great scandal indeed was coming.
They would see him, our Lord, in his torment.
His holy face obscured by an agony of bloody sweat as the God-man trembled before the weight of our sins and the coldness of our hearts.
Therefore, today,
As our Lord's heart turns towards the holy mountains of Jerusalem and the cross atop Calvary, He pauses first in today's Holy Gospel to fortify the hearts of these three men whom He loves by a vision to encourage them in their love of their Divine Master.
Of course, we know that the holy Gospels do not end on Mount Tabor.
Peter would build a tents in vain
If he believed he could forestall his master's suffering and death, our Lord refuses to delay.
There are souls to save.
There is a divine fire that burns in the sacred heart that will not rest until that heart itself will cease to beat, having atoned for the sin of every human heart.
When they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus himself alone.
Saint Peter received extraordinary graces and was anointed the Prince of the Apostles, but he would not understand the importance of this day until after he had betrayed our Lord by denying him three times and after sincerely repenting, atoned in all humility.
Jesus sought to console Peter, James, and John to encourage them to remain faithful to him in the time of trial and temptation.
It was their refusal, especially that of Saint Peter, to remain near to the heart of our Lord, attentive to him, seeking him alone that provoked them to abandon our Lord at that crucial moment of his passion.
If we place our hearts, our love in constellations alone, we too will abandon our Lord when the fire of passion comes to prove of what spiritual metal
we are truly made.
We seek, as St. Francis De Sales says, not the consolations of God, but the God of all consolation.
We may rightly acknowledge before God our weakness and frailty.
Like St. Peter, each of us has received choice graces from the heart of our divine Savior.
But we may and should also acknowledge our sinfulness.
our frequent inability to live in accordance with the glory of the Christian name.
By the many workings of his providence, our Lord may send to us moments like Mount Tabor, encouragements in the events unfolding in our lives, and the love of those nearest to us, in that interior voice that he inspires within us, and the peace that his presence brings.
Yet these moments of encouragement are not the same as holiness,
The affections in our heart, St. Francis the Sail says, are only good if they produce good works.
That is to say they are only good if they bring forth fruit in patience by using these encouragements to sacrifice our will on the altar of the duties of our state of life.
No matter how displeasing or difficult they may be.
Consolation's great and small
our graces to strengthen our resolve to seek our Lord with ever greater ardor.
In the constellations of our personal taboos be they material, bodily health, the esteem of our neighbor, material success, et cetera, or spiritual, interior joy and satisfaction.
It is easier for us to thank our Lord for his many graces than we should.
However, we should use these to serve Him better, more generously, to prepare ourselves more readily for the inevitable crosses that await all who truly wish to follow our Lord and Savior to fight alongside our crucified God.
There may be moments of quiet on Tabor, but there you will find no lasting peace.
Indeed, O Christian soul, where will you find the tree of life and the hope of freedom?
Where will you find our blessed mother standing firm in her anguish?
Where will you find the penitent Magdalene?
Where will you find the holy women?
Where will you find the Virgin Saint John?
Where will you find that fountain of life flowing forth from the pierced heart of our Lord Jesus Christ?
You will not find them in the splendor of Tabor but in the darkness of Calvary.
There is certainly nothing wrong with constellations.
The same God who will test each of us by the fire of tribulation also ordains in His holy providence that these constellations should come for our encouragement.
We should therefore accept constellations simply
but use them chastely.
To use a consolation chastely means to use it with a disinterested heart, not to subsume it for our own pleasure and satisfaction, but to see in any consolation the hand of a loving Father extended to help us as we progress to the next trial.
When they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus himself.
alone.
We too should see Jesus alone whether we be on Tabor or on Calvary at this moment in our lives.
It is Jesus alone that we must seek.
It is the thought of doing His will, keeping His commandments, especially the commandments of charity that must dominate our thoughts.
Christian perfection consists in being able to be led simply like a child
in the arms of our Heavenly Father, not paying attention to where we are being led, but safe in the knowledge that we are firmly fixed in the will of Him who loves us, in the arms of Him who saves us.
It is that ideal that our Mother and Queen, the Blessed Virgin Mary, cultivated perfectly.
St. Francis de Sales describes that same ideal thus when he says,
We should dispose ourselves to persevere in the holy love of God, even if through our whole life we were never to experience any consolation.
Ever ready to say, as well upon Calvary, as upon Tabor, Lord, it is well that we are here with you, whether upon your cross or in your glory.
Like our immaculate and sorrowful Queen,
We must be ready to adore Him in joy at Bethlehem, to dine and feast with Him with our Lord at Cana, but also to weep with Him over Lazarus, to weep with Him over Jerusalem, to pray and keep watch with Him in Gethsemane, to die with Him on Calvary.
Amen.
In the name of the Father and of the Son, the Holy Ghost.
We hope you enjoyed that sermon entitled, They Saw No One Except Jesus Alone.
Our final sermon for today is entitled, The Road to Mount Tabor.
In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, amen.
The colic for the mass of the second Sunday of Lent
O God, who seeest how we are destitute of all strength, keep us inwardly and outwardly that in body we may be defended from all adversities and in mind cleansed of evil thoughts.
I begin by setting this colloc because as we are doing throughout the week, we have the theme this year for our Lenten pilgrimage together of the prayers each day of the Mass, always looking at the colloc, the secret,
the post-communion or the prayer over the people at the end.
It may seem at first glance that today's collect has little to do with the theme of the rest of the mass, especially that most glorious and sublime gospel which we have today, which has made this Sunday so famous as it was called in past ages simply, Transfiguration Sunday.
So important is this gospel in the mind of Holy Mother Church that we have it twice.
It is simply a repetition of the gospel we had on the very ancient mass yesterday, November Saturday.
The gospel heard by those who had just been ordained to the holy priesthood according to the ritual that has existed in the church since the earliest centuries.
I would say, Harvard, that the collect of today's mass truly has everything to do with what the church wishes to teach us today by placing
this mystery of the transfiguration of our Lord at this point during our lint and journey.
We might well ask, why is the transfiguration so important?
Certainly we can understand why among all our fathers in the faith we find countless sermons about the nativity of our Lord, the coming of our Savior into the world.
Still more
about his passion and death and his resurrection, by which he purchased for us our redemption.
Yes, all this is very clear to us.
When it comes to the transfiguration, however, we might suppose at first, is this not just one more event in the course of our Lord's public ministry?
What precisely does it have to do with our sanctification and our salvation?
Is that not already covered enough by our consideration of our Lord's nativity and his passion and resurrection?
From the very beginning, the Church has thought otherwise, for we will never have done with all the sermons that have been written by the Fathers on this mystery of the Transfiguration.
Yes, the Church Fathers both in East and West simply marvel at this mystery
and wish to plummet to its very depths.
I cannot possibly share with you today all of their beautiful thoughts, but it is important to share at least a few so that we may profit by what the Church wishes to convey to us today in order especially to give us courage and strength on our journey and allow the grace of Christ to work within us, to cleanse us as we pray in today's Mass,
from all adversities and from all evil thoughts.
I would propose then, in order to sum up the thoughts of those who have gone before us, two reasons why this mystery of the transfiguration is so important for our consideration.
The first is the reason why it was so important to those
who witnessed it, those blessed three, Peter, James, and John.
They're the fathers of very clear.
The reason why they saw this mystery is simple.
The servant is not greater than his master.
Our Lord came in his teaching to provide a fulfillment of the summary
of the law on the prophets.
Yet when we look in the Old Testament, we find that the law on the prophets, that is, Moses and Elias, received single graces from Almighty God.
Moses himself, in fact, was transfigured on a mountain.
He was allowed to see in a cloud, or not look upon his face, nevertheless to see
the Lord passing by.
He could not look upon his glory lest he would die.
However, even this very veil epiphany of the Lord to Moses was such that Moses himself shone like the sun, as we are told.
So bright was his face that they could not even look on him as he descended from the mount.
And as for Elias, he was taken up in a chariot
at the close of his time here on earth.
And so looking on these two servants of God, law and the prophets, it was necessary for the blessed Trinity to make clear that this was not just one more servant of God.
This was truly the master.
Peter, seeing our Lord transfigured and seeing him speaking,
with Moses and Elias, proposes to make three tabernacles.
One for our Lord, one for Moses, and one for Elias.
But he is immediately interrupted in his proposal by the voice of God himself.
Three times in the life of our Lord on earth do we hear of the appearance of all three persons of the Blessed Trinity.
First on the Annunciation, at the moment of our Savior's conception in Mary's womb and his anointing as high priest, the intro Gabriel says to Mary, the spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee.
Therefore the Holy One that is born of thee shall be called the Son of God.
And again, that our Lord's epiphany, that is his baptism and the start of his public ministry,
We read when Jesus was baptized, he went up immediately from the water, and behold, the heavens were open.
And he saw the Spirit of God descending and alighting upon him, the form of a dove and the voice from heaven saying, this is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.
Now it is the voice of a father,
the voice of the Father through a cloud that we hear.
And it comes as a sort of correction to Peter who wishes to build these three tabernacles.
Church Father St. Jerome perhaps explains this best, saying, you err, Peter.
And St. Luke adds, you know not what you say.
Do not seek three tabernacles, since one is the dwelling place of the gospel.
in which are summed up both the law and the prophets.
But if you do seek for three tabernacles, do not place the servants on the same level with their master.
But make three tabernacles, rather make but one for the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
So as one is their divinity, so let one be their tabernacle.
And let that tabernacle be thy own heart.
If we wish, though, the most profound explanation for the meaning of this epiphany, this theophany of our Lord and Mount Tabor, we can look even farther back to the writings of those who were the eyewitnesses.
As to St. James, the brother of St. John, that is St. James the greater, we have no record
of any account, where it is not he who wrote the epistle of St. James, that is St. James the last.
But as for Peter and John, we have the most beautiful testimony.
The first is from those words, which we hear at the end of every mass in the last gospel.
And St. John tells us to all who received him, believed in his name, he gave power
to become children of God who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of God.
And the word became flesh and dwelt among us, or as we read in the Greek, and made his tabernacle among us.
And we gazed upon his glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth.
St. Peter goes even further in explaining the grace of the transfiguration.
and how it makes clear to us the nature of our calling.
In his second epistle we read, his divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us to his own glory and excellence, by which he has granted us his most great and precious promises, that through these you may fly from the corruption of that concupiscence which has agendaed the world and become partakers.
of the divine nature.
For he received from God the Father honoring glory, this voice coming down to him from the excellent glory.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased.
Hear ye him.
And this voice we heard from heaven when we were with him on the Holy Mount.
How can we arrive at this most sublime promise
The promise that through Christ we may become partakers of the divine nature.
The gospel leaves no room for doubt.
All three of the Synoptic Gospels are very clear in the order of events.
Just before the passage that we have in our missile today, whether it be in St. Matthew or in St. Mark or St. Luke, we find three things.
First of all, there is Peter's confession of faith and then his establishment as the Rock of the Church and the Vicar of Christ.
Then our Lord predicts his passion to his disciples and then rebukes Peter, who tries to impede him from going to Jerusalem.
Finally, our Lord declares, if any man would follow me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
For what will it profit a man if he gained the whole world and forfeit his soul?
Or what shall a man give in exchange for his own soul?
For the Son of man is to come with his angels and the glory of his Father, and then he will repay every man for what he has done.
The teaching of our Lord and the Apostles is clear to reach Mount Tabor, to partake of the divine nature through this grace of the Transfiguration,
We must first join our Savior on two other mounts, Mount Olivet and Mount Calvary.
The only way to Mount Tabor is the royal way of the cross.
And perhaps of all writers in the history of the Church, no one has made this more clear than one of a later age that is in the glorious Middle Ages, that beautiful author
of the imitation of Christ, this book which we can never have done within our meditation, especially during Lent.
As he tells us, Jesus always has many who love his heavenly kingdom, but few who bear his cross.
He has many who desire consolation, but few who care for trial.
He finds many to share his table, but few to take part in his fasting.
All desire to be happy with him.
Few wish to suffer anything for him.
Many follow him to the breaking of bread, but few to the drinking of the chalice of his passion.
Many review his miracles.
Few approach the shame of his cross.
Many love him as long as they encounter no hardship.
Many praise and bless him as long as they receive some comfort from him.
But if Jesus hides himself and leaves them for a while, they fall either into complaints or into deep dejection.
To many, this saying is hard.
Deny thyself, take up thy cross, and follow me.
But it will be much harder to hear that final word.
Depart from me ye cursed and to everlasting fire.
Those who hear the word of the cross and willingly follow it need not fear that they will hear of eternal damnation on the day of judgment.
The sign of the cross will be in the heavens when the Lord comes to judge.
Then all the servants of the cross who during life made themselves one with the crucified will draw near with great trust to Christ the judge.
Why then do you fear to take up the cross
When through it, you can win a kingdom.
And the cross is salvation, the cross is life, and the cross is protection from enemies, and the cross infusion of heavenly sweetness, and the cross strength of mind, joy of spirit, highest virtue, perfect holiness.
There is no salvation of soul nor hope in everlasting life, but in the cross.
Take up your cross, therefore, and follow Jesus.
Just then during this let us all take up our cross, let us all willingly accompany our Lord and not sleep but wait with Him in the Garden of Olives and follow Him all the way to Calvary.
That we may taste in this life through grace that partaking of the divine nature which we found on Mount Tabor and thus inherit one day eternal life forever and ever.
Amen.
We hope you enjoyed our final sermon for today entitled, The Road to Mount Tabor.
Thank you for listening to the Station of the Cross presents, Sermons for Everyday Living.
May these sermons help you grow in your faith journey.
Please say three Hail Marys for the priests who preached today's sermons.
We hope you will join us again next time for, Sermons for Everyday Living.
Have a blessed day.